In this video, we'll learn more
about the stl deque container.
In order to use the deque, we must
pound include the deque header file.
The deque acts like a
double-ended queue.
The deque size is dynamic, and
it's handled by the stl so
that's very much like a vector.
But unlike a vector, the
elements in the deque are not
stored in contiguous memory.
The deque allows direct element
access using the subscript
operator and the .at method.
But unlike a vector that allows
efficient insertion and deletion
only at the back, the deque allows
at the back and at the front.
However, inserting elements into any
other part of the deque other than the
front or back is not as efficient.
The deque supports all of the
iterators and the iterators may
become invalid again especially
when the deque changes size.
Let's first look at a few ways
to initialize deques and then we'll
see some of its member methods.
In the first example in this slide,
I declared d as a deque of integers
and initialized it to 1 2 3 4 and 5.
In the second example, I declare
d1 as a deque of integers.
And I'm using an overloaded
constructor to create 10 integers
and initialize them all to 100.
Of course, like all the stl
containers, the deque supports
copy and move semantics for
initialization and assignment.
In the third example, I'm
declaring stooges as a deque of
std strings, and I'm initializing
it to Larry Moe and Curly.
Now notice that Moe
is a c-style string.
Like vectors and std arrays,
deques also support assignment
via initializer list.
So let's see some common methods
provided by the deque container.
In this slide, we'll see what
a simple deque looks like.
We declare d as a deque of integers,
and we initialize it to 1 2 3.
The deque has a front and a back.
The front in this case is the
element 1 and the back is element 3.
With the deque, we can efficiently
add elements and remove elements
from both the front and the back.
In a deque, the push back method works
very much as it does in a vector.
The element to be added is
pushed at the back of the deque.
And the push front method adds
the element to be inserted
at the front of the deque.
Now let's see how the elements in
the deque might be stored in memory.
Remember, the deque's elements
are not in contiguous memory.
So usually a deque is implemented as
a collection of memory blocks, and
these memory blocks contain elements
that are in a contiguous memory.
But the blocks themselves
are not in contiguous memory.
So a good way to think of a deque
is as a linked list of vectors.
So when we add an element at the
front, it adds it if there's space.
If not, it will allocate a new
block, add the element to that
block and then link in the block.
The same happens when we
add an element at the back.
Again, please refer to the c++
stl documentation for details on
all of the methods for the deque.
There's a lot there, and
that's the place to go to.
The documentation is your friend.
Don't think programmers keep all
these details in our heads, we don't.
We refer to the c++ docs very often.
Generally, it's open
on a second monitor.
It's the same for java programmers.
Usually, they've got the java
docs open in a second monitor.
And that's where all
the good information is.
So let's see some of these methods.
Let's start with the size method.
This method returns the number
of elements that are in the deque.
The max size we've already seen
with vectors and std arrays, it's
a pretty big number that just says
how many elements can i store.
Deques also allow individual access
using either the subscript operator
or the .at method and the rules are
the same here if you use the subscript
operator, no balance checking is done.
But if you use the .at method,
balance checking will happen
and an exception will be thrown
if you're out of bounce.
In this case, you can see
that I'm using d.at0, that
refers to the 1 in the deque d,
and d sub-1 refers to the 2.
The deque also provides front and
back methods that return references
to the elements at the front of the
deque and at the back of the deque.
So in this example, d.front refers to
the 1 and d d.back refers to the 5.
As I previously mentioned, the
deque allows for efficiently
inserting and removing elements
at the front and at the back.
Inserting is done with the pushback
method and the push front method.
We also have a pop back and a pop
front which you officially remove
elements from the back of the front.
In this slide, we have a deque of
person objects and called it d.
We can create a person p1 named
Larry who is 18 years old.
And we can use the push back method
to insert p1 at the back of the deque.
We can also remove it using pop back.
Similarly, we can add a person object
to the front of the deque with push
front and remove it with pop front.
Remember, all container classes make
copies of the elements they store.
The deque container also supports
in place front and in place back,
which are super efficient ways to
create initialize objects and store
them in the deque right in place.
So now let's head over to the IDE.
We'll see some examples.
And in the video after that
we'll have some challenge
exercises that use deques.
Okay, so I'm in the IDE. I'm
in the section 20 workspace
in the deque project.
And this is a really simple example.
The idea behind using a deque
is that we're going to use the
front of it or the back of it.
We're not really going to be inserting
things into the middle of it.
If you need to do that kind
of thing, you're probably
better off using a list.
We'll talk about the list later.
So I'm not going to go into any of
the fancy stuff where you can insert
things into the middle of a deque.
I'm just going to keep it
really simple because that's
usually the way we use a deque.
So let's start with looking
at what we've got here.
We're including a deque, a
vector and an algorithm.
We're using the vector in a minute
just to do a little simple example.
And here I've got my display function
that will display any type of deque.
I'm only using deques of integers
in this example, but it's nice
to have this template function.
You can play around with it and
practice writing these actually.
This is a really, really
easy one to write.
I went over this one in the previous
video, the video for vectors.
Okay, so let's take a look at test 1.
I've already run the program.
The output is over here, on
the right in the console.
And let's walk through these
tests so you can understand
what's happening here.
So this is test 1 right here.
You can see the output
of test 1 right up here.
First thing we're doing is we're
declaring d as a deque of integers,
and we're putting 1 to 5 in there.
And then we're displaying the deque.
So there it is right here,
just as we would expect.
Then I've got an assignment.
I'm using the initializer list to
assign, which, again, is really handy.
So now d is 2 4 5 6,
and I'm displaying that.
You can see 2 4 5 6 right here.
Now just like we did with the
vector here, I'm creating 10
100s, and I'm putting them in
the deque and displaying them.
You can see all 100s right here.
And the last thing is right here.
We're doing direct access to the deque.
You don't often do this with a deque.
Remember, the deque -- the
whole point of a deque is
to be a doubly ended queue.
So you're going to work on the front,
and you're going to work at the back.
That's the idea.
But it lets you have random access
to the elements within it at in
constant time, which is cool.
So d sub-0 with the index
operator is this is d now, so
it's going to put 100 in here.
And d at 1 we'll put 200 in there.
And when we display that, you
can see right here the 100 and
the 200 replaced the 1 and the 2.
All right, so that's
pretty straightforward.
Let's look at test 2.
Test 2 is the real workhorse here.
This is the way you
typically use a deque.
We're using push back and push
front and pop back and so forth.
So let's go over this one because
these are the methods that you're
going to really use a lot with the deque.
So what I'm doing here is I'm
creating a deque called d again
of integers, and it's 0 0 0.
And the reason I put 0 0 0 in
there is just so we can have
these 3 0s in the center.
That way we can really understand
how things are being pushed in.
And we're displaying it, you
can see right there the 3 0s.
Now we're saying push back a
10, and then push back a 20.
That means at the back.
So first, I push back
the 10 and then the 20.
Remember, they're being pushed back
this way, and display them and you can
see what we've got 3 0s, 10 and a 20.
Now I want to push front.
So now I'm going to push these guys
at the front 100 and then I push 200.
I'm pushing them this way,
and I'm displaying it again.
And I've got right here 200 100
the 3 0s and then the 10 and the
20, of course, are still there.
We've got our front method
which returns a reference to
the front element, which in this
case is that guy right here.
I've got my back method, which
returns a reference to the back
element which is the 20 right
here and the size, which is 7.
So when we look at the output
right here, you can see the front
is 200, the back is 20 and the
size is 7, and we display it right
after we pop a few things off it.
So let's try that.
So first thing we do
is we pop the back.
That guy's gone.
And then we pop the front, and that
guy's gone, and we display it again.
So now we're going to
display 100 0 0 0 10.
Notice how the 200 and the 20 are gone.
So this is really the way
you're going to use the deque.
If you find yourself using a deque
and fiddling around with the middle
elements and inserting things into
the middle and doing all kinds of
stuff like that, maybe the deque
is not what you should be using.
Consider using a list, and
we'll talk about a list in the
next section of the course.
Okay, so that takes care of test 2.
Let's take a look at test 3.
And what I've got here in test 3.
This is what i wanna do.
I've got a vector of 10 integers
right here, 1 through 10.
And I've got a deque d, which is empty.
And what I want to do is I want
to insert all the even numbers
into the back of the deque and all
the odd numbers into the front.
It's pretty easy to do.
I could just use a range-based
for loop right here.
And I can iterate over that vector.
Remember, we're coming from
a vector to a deque this time.
And if the element mod 2 is
0, that means it is even.
And if it's even, I'm pushing
it onto the back, right.
So where we start.
We're starting with the number is
even, we're pushing it in the back.
The number is odd, we're
pushing it into the front.
So we're going to have the 1
the 2 the 3 the 4 the 5 the 6.
This is what's going to
happen, the 8 the 9 and the 10.
That's the result right there.
And when we look at the
display for test 3, right here,
that's exactly what we've got.
We've got all the odd numbers here
and all the even numbers right there.
Now let's take a look at test 4.
Test 4 is simple but important.
It shows you the ordering of things.
When we push stuff on the front
versus we push stuff on the back,
the ordering is obviously different,
but this confuses people sometimes.
And I've seen a lot of little
mistakes from programmers
that use deques this way and it
comes up a lot in code reviews.
So let's take a look.
Here we've got a vector
again, 1 through 10.
And what I'm doing is I'm going
through the entire vector this time.
There's no if statement.
There's no odd even stuff.
That's all I'm doing is I'm
going through that vector and
I'm grabbing each element and
I'm pushing it in the front.
So we're starting at the 1.
So we're pushing it 1 2 3 4 5.
Remember, we're pushing
things on the front.
So this is the result.
That's a 9 right there.
That's the result.
So when I display this -- and
again, I'm in test 4.
You can see it's 10 9 8,
all the way down to 1.
I'm gonna clear the deque here.
Then I'm going to do the same thing
except now I'm going to push back.
This time we're pushing
this way, right.
So we're going to have 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 and 10.
And when we display that, you can
see that that's exactly what we get.
Obviously, the order is
going to be different, right.
One's going to be going from
1 to 10, the other from 10 to
1, depending on whether we do
a push front or a push back.
And as I said, this is -- sounds
simple, but I've seen a lot of
little mistakes using this because
somehow people get confused.
Let's take a look at
the last test, test 5.
So what we're going to do now is
we're going to do the same thing
we did in test 4 except we're
going to use std copy to do it.
So what do we have.
We have the same vector, and we
have a deque that's empty again.
And what we're going to do is we're
simply going to copy everything
in the vector from begin to end.
And we're going to use the
front inserter iterator to do
it, so one line of code handles
this really, really easily.
So again, loop through the
vector at the entire vector.
And for each element in that vector,
insert it to the front of the deque d.
So this is test 5.
When we display that, this
is what we get right here.
Notice it's the same as test 4
because we're inserting at the front.
And we can clear the
deque and do it again.
So copy vec.begin to vec.n.
And this time we're going
to do the back inserter.
We're inserting at the back this way.
And what we're going to get is
the same thing we got with test 4.
So which should you use, I tend to like
this, this is much more expressive.
Most programmers will understand this.
A lot of programmers are not real
familiar with the stl algorithms.
So this kind of code right here
is foreign to them, and they
could really mess things up,
especially junior programmers.
Junior programmers -- the stl
is a complicated beast, and a
lot of junior programmers just
know the very basics of it.
So when you get a lot of algorithms
put together with iterators and
inserters, it's likely a lot of the
junior programmers haven't seen that.
So there you go.
That's it.
So that takes care of the deque.
In the next video, we'll do the
first challenge for the deque.